Deﬁning Computational Thinking for Mathematics and Science
Classrooms
David Weintrop 1,2 • Elham Beheshti 3 • Michael Horn 1,2,3 • Kai Orton 1,2 •
Kemi Jona 2,3 • Laura Trouille 5,6 • Uri Wilensky 1,2,3,4
Published online: 8 October 2015
/C211Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015
Abstract Science and mathematics are becoming com-
putational endeavors. This fact is reﬂected in the recently
released Next Generation Science Standards and the deci-
sion to include ‘ ‘computational thinking’ ’ as a core scien-
tiﬁc practice. With this addition, and the increased presence
of computation in mathematics and scientiﬁc contexts, a
new urgency has come to the challenge of deﬁning com-
putational thinking and providing a theoretical grounding
for what form it should take in school science and math-
ematics classrooms. This paper presents a response to this
challenge by proposing a deﬁnition of computational
thinking for mathematics and science in the form of a
taxonomy consisting of four main categories: data prac-
tices, modeling and simulation practices, computational
problem solving practices, and systems thinking practices.
In formulating this taxonomy, we draw on the existing
computational thinking literature, interviews with mathe-
maticians and scientists, and exemplary computational
thinking instructional materials. This work was undertaken
as part of a larger effort to infuse computational thinking
into high school science and mathematics curricular
materials. In this paper, we argue for the approach of
embedding computational thinking in mathematics and
science contexts, present the taxonomy, and discuss how
we envision the taxonomy being used to bring current
educational efforts in line with the increasingly computa-
tional nature of modern science and mathematics.
Keywords Computational thinking /C1High school
mathematics and science education /C1STEM education /C1
Scientiﬁc practices /C1Systems thinking /C1Modeling and
simulation /C1Computational problem solving
Introduction
By 2020, one of every two jobs in the ‘ ‘STEM’ ’ ﬁelds
will be in computing
(ACM pathways report 2013)
The release of the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) places a new emphasis on authentic investigation
in the classroom, including eight distinct scientiﬁc prac-
tices (NGSS Lead States 2013). While some of these
practices are familiar to veteran teachers, such as ‘ ‘asking
questions and deﬁning problems,’ ’ others are less well
understood. In particular, the practice of ‘ ‘using mathe-
matics and computational thinking’ ’ reﬂects the growing
importance of computation and digital technologies across
the scientiﬁc disciplines. Similar educational outcomes can
be found in mathematics standards, such as the Common
Core guidelines, which state that students should be able
‘ ‘to use technological tools to explore and deepen their
& David Weintrop
dweintrop@u.northwestern.edu
1 Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based
Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208,
USA
2 Learning Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL 60208, USA
3 Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL 60208, USA
4 Northwestern Institute on Complex Systems, Evanston,
IL 60208, USA
5 The Adler Planetarium, Chicago, IL 60605, USA
6 Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration and Research in
Astrophysics (CIERA), Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL 60208, USA
123
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
DOI 10.1007/s10956-015-9581-5
understanding of concepts’ ’ (National Governors Associa-
tion 2010, p. 7). However, the inclusion of these practices,
in and of itself, offers little guidance for teachers who will
be required to realize them in their classrooms. Much of the
difﬁculty stems from the fact that the practices collected
under the umbrella term ‘ ‘computational thinking’ ’ (Na-
tional Research Council [NRC] 2010; Wing 2006; Papert
1996) have not yet been clearly deﬁned. This is especially
true for their use in scientiﬁc or mathematical contexts as
opposed to more general computer science settings. There
is also active debate and discussion around key questions
such as: How is computational thinking related to mathe-
matical thinking, algorithmic thinking, or problem solving?
How does it relate to the ﬁeld of computer science? To
what extent is computer programming involved? Does
computational thinking always require a computer?
Our aim in this paper is to develop a more nuanced
understanding of computational thinking speciﬁcally as it
applies to the mathematic and scientiﬁc disciplines and the
needs of high school teachers who are expected to prepare
students for potential careers in these ﬁelds. Unlike most of
the discussion on computational thinking to date, which
emphasizes topics from computer science such as abstrac-
tion and algorithms, our approach to deﬁning computational
thinking takes the form of a taxonomy of practices focusing
on the application of computational thinking to mathemat-
ics and science. This approach employs mathematics and
science as meaningful contexts in which to situate the
concepts and practices of computational thinking and draws
on the ways mathematicians and scientists are using com-
putational thinking to advance their disciplines. This more
restrictive context allows us to more clearly characterize
what computational thinking is in mathematics and science.
The taxonomy consists of four main categories: data
practices, modeling and simulation practices, computational
problem solving practices, and systems thinking practices.
We describe each of these practices and their constituent
components, and we describe what it looks like to demon-
strate mastery of each practice. The contribution of this work
is to provide an actionable, classroom-ready deﬁnition of
computational thinking that draws on existing computational
thinking scholarship and incorporates concepts speciﬁcally
focused on mathematics and science contexts. In doing so,
we provide a framework and shared language that can be
used to bring mathematics and science instruction more in
line with their increasingly computational nature. Further, in
grounding our conception of computational thinking in
mathematics and science, we narrow the scope of computa-
tional thinking away from generalities, providing a sharper
deﬁnition that is distinct from computer science, yet still
grounded in authentic, meaningful computational practices
that are essential for students to master.
Why Bring Computational Thinking
to Mathematics and Science Classrooms?
A primary motivation for introducing computational
thinking practices into science and mathematics classrooms
is the rapidly changing nature of these disciplines as they
are practiced in the professional world (Bailey and Bor-
wein 2011; Foster 2006; Henderson et al. 2007). In the last
20 years, nearly every ﬁeld related to science and mathe-
matics has seen the growth of a computational counterpart.
Examples include Bioinformatics, Computational Statis-
tics, Chemometrics, and Neuroinformatics. This rise in
importance of computation with respect to mathematics,
science, and the broader Science, Technology, Engineer-
ing, and Mathematics (STEM) ﬁelds has been recognized
both by those within the STEM education communities and
computer science education organizations (ACM/IEEE-CS
Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula 2013). Bringing
computational tools and practices into mathematics and
science classrooms gives learners a more realistic view of
what these ﬁelds are, better prepares students for pursuing
careers in these disciplines (Augustine 2005; Gardner
1983), and helps equip students to be more savvy STEM
citizens in the future. As Foster ( 2006), director of the
Computation Lab at the University of Chicago, states, ‘ ‘all
scientists will be adept at applying existing computational
techniques’ ’ (p. 419). Further, the varied and applied use of
computational thinking by experts in the ﬁeld provides a
roadmap for what computational thinking instruction
should include in the classroom.
From a pedagogical perspective, the thoughtful use of
computational tools and skillsets can deepen learning of
mathematics and science content (Guzdial 1994; Eisenberg
2002; National Research Council 2011a, b; Redish and
Wilson 1993; Repenning et al. 2010; Sengupta et al. 2013;
Sherin 2001; Wilensky 1995; Wilensky et al. 2014;
Wilensky and Reisman 2006). The reverse is also true—
namely that science and mathematics provide a meaningful
context (and set of problems) within which computational
thinking can be applied (Hambrusch et al. 2009; Jona et al.
2014; Lin et al. 2009; Wilensky et al. 2014). This differs
markedly from teaching computational thinking as part of a
standalone course in which the assignments that students
are given tend to be divorced from real-world problems and
applications. This sense of authenticity and real-world
applicability is important in the effort to motivate diverse
and meaningful participation in computational and scien-
tiﬁc activities (Blikstein 2013; Chinn and Malhotra 2002;
Confrey 1993; Margolis and Fisher 2003; Margolis 2008;
Ryoo et al. 2013). This reciprocal relationship—using
computation to enrich mathematics and science learning
and using mathematics and science contexts to enrich
128 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
computational learning—is at the heart of our motivation to
bring computational thinking and science and mathematics
concepts together.
A ﬁnal motivation for bringing computational thinking
into mathematics and science classrooms is to reach the
widest possible audience and address longstanding issues
of the underrepresentation of women and minorities in
computational ﬁelds (National Science Foundation 2013).
Currently, only a fraction of high school students have the
opportunity to take a computer science course due to a lack
of qualiﬁed teachers, inadequate facilities, or constraints in
class scheduling. Embedding computational thinking
activities in mathematics and science coursework directly
addresses the issue of students self-selecting into (or out of)
computer science classes, which has been a challenge long
plaguing the effort to reach underserved youth (Margolis
and Fisher 2003; Margolis 2008). It also avoids practical
issues of ﬁtting new classes into overcrowded school
schedules and ﬁnding teachers to teach them.
Intended Audiences
One contribution of the work we present here is an
actionable set of guidelines that can be followed to bring
computational thinking into mathematics and science
classrooms quickly and effectively. In choosing to span
mathematics and science broadly, this taxonomy deﬁnes a
shared language that can be used across classrooms and
departments to help students understand the crosscutting
nature and broad applicability of computational thinking.
As such, the taxonomy we present in this paper is intended
for a diverse set of educational stakeholders including
teachers, administrators, curriculum designers, assessment
developers, and education researchers. For teachers, our
taxonomy is meant to provide a concrete, clearly delineated
set of practices to guide classroom implementation and
curriculum development. We hope to help teachers
understand how they are already using computational
thinking practices in their classes and to support them in
more fully developing those aspects of their lessons. Our
goal is not to radically change the existing practices of
experienced teachers; instead, we want this taxonomy to
serve as a resource for augmenting existing pedagogy and
curriculum with more sophisticated computational thinking
practices. For administrators and policy makers, the tax-
onomy is meant to help shape expectations and set priori-
ties for mathematics and science education, particularly
when it comes to preparing students for the demands of the
twenty-ﬁrst century. Understanding the increasingly com-
putational dimensions of these ﬁelds might also help
administrators allocate professional development resources
according to teacher needs.
For curriculum developers and other designers of
learning experiences, our hope is that the taxonomy will
serve as a resource to address ‘ ‘what’ ’ and ‘ ‘how’ ’ questions
that accompany the creation of new educational materials.
With the increased importance of accountability in our
schools, the need for accurate, validated assessments is
essential. By providing a clear deﬁnition of what compu-
tational thinking in scientiﬁc and mathematical contexts
includes, this taxonomy can be used as a resource for
assessment developers who are tasked with creating the
items that will measure these practices.
Finally, for education researchers, we view this work as
both a theoretical and practical contribution to our under-
standing of the nature of science and mathematics educa-
tion in our increasingly technological age. While the
practices of science and mathematics have greatly changed
over the past 50 years due to advancing technology,
classrooms have not kept pace. By delineating the space of
computational thinking with respect to these ﬁelds, we
hope to provide a resource for other educational research-
ers to use in their efforts to modernize science and math-
ematics learning to better prepare students for the
computational future that awaits them.
Background
In this section, we brieﬂy review three literatures that have
informed the taxonomy we present in this paper. First, we
review the literature on computational thinking, situating it
historically, and illustrating relevant recent efforts to
operationalize the concept. We then discuss research
focusing on bringing computational thinking into the
classroom, a goal that is central to our research agenda.
Finally, we review the growing role of computation in
mathematics and science ﬁelds.
Computational Thinking
To reading, writing, and arithmetic, we should add
computational thinking to every child’s analytical
ability
(Wing 2006,p .3 3 )
The driving theme behind the recent interest in com-
putational thinking is that knowledge and skills from the
ﬁeld of computer science have far reaching applications
from which everyone can beneﬁt: ‘ ‘[computational think-
ing] represents a universally applicable attitude and skill
set everyone, not just computer scientists, would be eager
to learn and use’ ’ (Wing 2006, p. 33). This argument has
been recurring, in one form or another, over the last half
century. Perlis ( 1962), the ﬁrst recipient of the ACM
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 129
123
Turing Award, said that all undergraduates should learn to
program as part of a liberal education (as cited in Guzdial
2008). Papert ( 1972, 1980) extended this vision to a full
literacy starting in childhood. Papert ( 1996) was the ﬁrst to
use the term computational thinking to refer to the affor-
dances of computational representations for expressing
powerful ideas. Similar calls have regularly been made in
the decades since (diSessa 2000; Kay and Goldberg 1977;
Guzdial and Soloway 2003; Papert 1972, 1980; Wilensky
2001).
The earliest work to put this idea into practice was the
development of the Logo programming language (Feurzeig
et al. 2011; Papert 1980). While Logo was designed most
immediately to teach mathematical concepts, its creators
quickly recognized the far reaching beneﬁts of the skills
learned through programming, arguing that ‘ ‘computer
presence could contribute to mental processes not only
instrumentally but in more essential, conceptual ways,
inﬂuencing how people think even when they are far
removed from physical contact with a computer’ ’ (Papert
1980, p. 4). Another important perspective on computa-
tional thinking comes from the work of diSessa ( 2000) and
his book Changing Minds. In particular, diSessa argues that
computers can be the basis for a powerful new form of
literacy that has the potential to be pervasive across sub-
jects, contexts, and domains.
A number of recent deﬁnitions have been proposed for
computational thinking without a consensus emerging
(Grover and Pea 2013). Wing proposes a deﬁnition that
emphasizes the unique contribution of the ﬁeld of computer
science to a broad range of human endeavor: ‘ ‘computa-
tional thinking involves solving problems, designing sys-
tems, and understanding human behavior, by drawing on
the concepts fundamental to computer science’ ’ (Wing
2006, p. 33). The Royal Society echoes this emphasis on
computer science, deﬁning computational thinking as ‘ ‘the
process of recognizing aspects of computation in the world
that surrounds us, and applying tools and techniques from
computer science to understand and reason about both
natural and artiﬁcial systems and processes’ ’ (Furber 2012,
p. 29). Highlighting the diversity and inclusive nature of
the debate around computational thinking, in 2010, the
National Research Council convened a meeting on the
scope and nature of computational thinking, producing a
report that listed over 20 high-level skills and practices that
computational thinking might include, such as problem
abstraction and decomposition, heuristic reasoning, search
strategies, and knowledge of computer science concepts
like parallel processing, machine learning, and recursion
(NRC 2010). In this work, we bring a different approach to
deﬁning computational thinking by relying on the appli-
cation of the practices identiﬁed above in contexts distinct
from computer science. In doing so, we move away from
relying on decontextualized ideas and practices and instead
draw on real-world instantiations of computational think-
ing in the wild to provide clarity and speciﬁcity on what the
term means. Doing so reinforces the argument that these
practices are broadly applicable while providing a con-
crete, actionable deﬁnition of computational thinking.
Much of the literature on computational thinking focu-
ses on educational outcomes, including a second meeting
convened by the National Research Council focusing on
the pedagogical aspects of computational thinking. This
effort sought to answer questions such as how computa-
tional thinking relates to existing subjects, what a compu-
tational thinking progression might look like, how to train
teachers in computational thinking practices, and how best
to assess computational thinking (NRC 2011b). The
Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) asserts
that ‘ ‘the study of computational thinking enables all stu-
dents to better conceptualize, analyze, and solve complex
problems by selecting and applying appropriate strategies
and tools, both virtually and in the real world’ ’ (CSTA
2011, p. 9). Although considerable effort has been put into
advancing our understanding of computational thinking,
there are still challenges to address, particularly in terms of
bringing computational thinking into schools. These chal-
lenges include deﬁning a learning progression and cur-
riculum, assessing student achievement, preparing
teachers, and ensuring equitable access (Grover and Pea
2013). For progress to be made in these areas, it will be
necessary to break computational thinking down into a set
of well-deﬁned and measurable skills, concepts, and/or
practices.
Computational Thinking in K-12 Education
Extensive research over the last three decades has focused
on issues related to teaching and learning skills, concepts,
and practices relevant to computational thinking (Grover
and Pea 2013). There have been a few notable efforts
towards creating frameworks and guidelines for bringing
computational thinking into K-12 education. Barr and
Stephenson ( 2011), in reporting on work from the com-
puter science education community, provide one approach
by proposing a deﬁnition for computational thinking across
all of K-12 education. As part of this effort, they present a
list of computational thinking concepts and map them onto
a variety of conventional school subjects, showing, for
example, what abstraction could look like in a social
studies classroom, or how to use automation in a mathe-
matics lesson. A second effort to provide useful structure
for operationalizing computational thinking in K-12 edu-
cation comes from Brennan and Resnick ( 2012) who pro-
pose a computational thinking framework consisting of
three dimensions: computational concepts, computational
130 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
practices, and computational perspectives. For each
dimension, they articulate what it looks like to engage in
computational thinking at that level, and provide guidelines
on how to assess computational thinking across the diverse
ways it can be used. In parallel to the effort of creating
frameworks for understanding and evaluating computa-
tional thinking, is the ongoing creation of new learning
environments, tools, and activities designed to promote
computational competencies in K-12 learning contexts.
Such efforts include graphical programming environments
such as Scratch (Resnick et al. 2009) and Alice (Cooper
et al. 2000); computational modeling environments like
STELLA (Richmond et al. 1987) and NetLogo (Wilensky
1999b); electronic prototyping kits such as Arduino and
digital textiles (Buechley et al. 2008); video games
including Quest Atlantis (Barab et al. 2005) and Robo-
Builder (Weintrop and Wilensky 2013); and scaffolded
scientiﬁc inquiry environments like WISE (Linn et al.
2003), Genscope (Horwitz et al. 1998), GasLab (Wilensky
1999a); Frog Pond—Evolution (Horn et al. 2014), and
WorldWatcher (Edelson et al. 1999). Other work focuses
not on the technology or medium used for computational
thinking instruction, but on the domain in which it is to be
situated. Computational thinking practices have been
integrated into subjects including history, language arts,
mathematics, art, and science (Blikstein and Wilensky
2009; Eisenberg 2002; Hambrusch et al. 2009; Rubin and
Nemirovsky 1991; Sengupta et al. 2013; Settle et al. 2012,
2013). A complementary approach to bringing computa-
tional thinking in K-12 education is to integrate it in the
coursework of pre-service teachers independent of their
content specialization (Yadav et al. 2011). The growth of
this type of work, the variety of forms it takes, and the
diversity of contexts it has been used in, speaks to the need
for the cross disciplinary computational thinking frame-
work we present herein.
Many researchers have made the argument that the
ability to effectively use computer simulations and inter-
active visualizations is an important aspect of computa-
tional thinking, particularly as it relates to the STEM ﬁelds
(NRC 2011b). For example, NetLogo (Wilensky 1999b)
has successfully been used in schools to introduce students
to complex systems and emergent phenomena in many
different ﬁelds such as probability and statistics (Abra-
hamson et al. 2006; Abrahamson and Wilensky 2005),
chemical reactions (Stieff and Wilensky 2003; Levy and
Wilensky 2009), kinetic molecular theory (Brady et al.
2015; Wilensky 1999a), population biology (Wilensky and
Reisman 2006), and evolution (Wilensky and Novak 2010;
Wagh and Wilensky 2014). Another example is Concord
Consortium’s Molecular Workbench, which is an interac-
tive modeling platform that enables students to study the
motion of particles and provides a simulation platform for
teaching and learning science through atomic-scale rea-
soning (Tinker and Xie 2008). The Physics Education
Technology (PhET) project is another example of such
learning environments, which provides a large collection of
web-based models and simulations for teaching STEM
content (Perkins et al. 2006; Bryan 2006).
Another notable approach to bringing computational
thinking into K-12 classrooms is the use of online com-
putational resources to enable learning experiences that are
otherwise not possible. For example, the iLab Network
provides experimental facilities via remote online labora-
tories that enable students and educators to use real
instruments, rather than simulations, and to carry out
experiments (Jona and Vondracek 2013). This gives stu-
dents access to a wide variety of scientiﬁc phenomena and
control of sophisticated experimental equipment. Activities
include studying radioactivity by taking measurements of
radioactive material with a Geiger counter, and studying
neutron diffraction using a crystal monochromator. Pro-
jects such as these bring together science, technology, and
computational thinking practices in an accessible and
engaging way.
The Growing Role of Computation in Mathematics
and Science
The landscape for science is changing. Recent advances in
high-speed computation and analytical methods have cre-
ated powerful tools for understanding phenomena across all
spectra of human inquiry. In some scientiﬁc ﬁelds, such as
molecular biology and chemistry, the advent has been
recent but rapid. The 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was
awarded to John A. Pople and Walter Kohn for their
innovative work in the development of computational
methods in quantum chemistry (Pople 2003; Kohn 2003).
Such a prestigious award hailed the acceptance of com-
putation as a valid and rigorous tool for investigating
chemical phenomena. Across a wide variety of domains,
the application of statistical and mathematical approaches
that rely on computation, such as Markov Chain Monte
Carlo methods and artiﬁcial neural networks, have proved
essential for opening new avenues of exploration and
yielded advances in numerous ﬁelds as diverse as studying
the origins of the universe in computational astrophysics
(Vogelsberger et al. 2014) to understanding the kinetics of
grain growth in material sciences (Anderson et al. 1984;
Srolovitz et al. 1984).
Wing ( 2006) stated that computational thinking approa-
ches would become fundamental across all disciplines and
that the advances in computing would allow researchers to
envision new problem solving strategies and to test new
solutions in both the virtual and real world. While certain
ﬁelds such as physics and engineering have a long-standing
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 131
123
interdisciplinary partnership with computational method-
ologies, classical approaches to problem solving in biology
and chemistry have historically emphasized deterministic
systems of low complexity, thereby largely ignoring
stochastic and nonlinear problems. The previous strong bias
toward the study of deterministic systems was primarily one
of practicality, with the term ‘ ‘nonlinear’ ’ being nearly
synonymously with ‘ ‘unsolvable’ ’. However, nature is
inherently nonlinear and may be characterized by chaotic
behavior, as can be observed in climate change (Dijkstra
2013; Manabe and Stouffer 1988), the spread of disease
(Keeling and Grenfell 1997; Olsen and Schaffer 1990),
ecological distress (Lubchenco et al. 1991), and evolution
(Lander and Schork 1994; Turelli and Barton 1994). Both
mathematically and physically, deterministic/linear systems
are the exceptions rather than the rule. In recent years,
computational methods have expanded the range of non-
linear phenomena that can be explored through the use of
mathematical and simulation models. Wolfram ( 2002) even
proclaimed the emergence of a new kind of science based on
his computational experiments into emergent patterns in
nature, arguing such explorations are not possible without
computation. Scientiﬁc ﬁelds are undergoing a renaissance
in experimental approaches primarily due to the availability
of more powerful computers, accessibility of new analytical
methods, and the development of highly detailed computa-
tional models in which a diverse array of components and
mechanisms can be incorporated. These advances have, in
turn, created a growing need to educate students in compu-
tational methods and techniques to support the rapidly
changing landscape of research across mathematics and
scientiﬁc disciplines.
Methods
To develop our taxonomy of computational thinking
practices for mathematics and science, we drew on multi-
ple resources to identify the characteristic practices that are
most important to both meet the needs of students and to
reﬂect the work of professionals across a range of mathe-
matics and science disciplines. Figure 1 illustrates the steps
that we followed to create the taxonomy. Throughout the
process, we worked closely with other STEM researchers,
teachers, and curriculum developers. We primarily drew on
three resources for creation and validation of our taxon-
omy: (1) exemplary educational activities involving com-
putational thinking in mathematics and science, (2)
existing concept inventories and standards documents, and
(3) interviews with mathematicians and scientists.
Step 1 The ﬁrst step in the creation of our taxonomy was
to review existing computational thinking literature, iden-
tifying the skills and practices that are repeatedly cited as
being central. This investigation began with the two
National Research Council publications on computational
thinking (NRC 2010, 2011b) and branched out from there,
reviewing literature cited in those reports along with work
that builds off the ideas presented in the two reports.
Because we see computational thinking as being heavily
informed by the ﬁelds of engineering and computer science,
we also gathered and analyzed computer science, engi-
neering, and technology content frameworks such as the CS
Principles project (Astrachan and Briggs 2012), the Com-
puter Science Curricula 2013 report (ACM/IEEE-CS Joint
Task Force on Computing Curricula 2013), and the NAEP
Technology and Engineering Literacy Framework (Driscoll
2013). In reviewing these documents, our goal was to map
out what the existing literature identiﬁed as central to
computational thinking with a focus on applications to
mathematics and science. Throughout this initial step, we
sought to understand the broader landscape of computa-
tional thinking before narrowing our focus to mathematics
and science disciplines. This review produced a preliminary
set of ten core computational thinking skills (Table 1),
which were used as a starting point for our taxonomy.
Step 2 The second step in creating the taxonomy was to
collect and classify a variety of activities designed to
introduce computational thinking into high school mathe-
matics and science classrooms. The primary corpus of the
activities analyzed was the materials produced as part of
‘ ‘Reach for the Stars,’ ’ an NSF funded program that links
STEM graduate students who use computation in their
research with high school teachers to develop classroom-
ready activities based on their research.
1 These lessons
span a variety of concepts across chemistry, physics,
biology, astronomy, earth sciences, networks, and pro-
gramming. Thirty lesson plans from this collection were
selected and coded for elements of computational thinking
(12 in physics, 8 in chemistry, 3 in biology, and 7 in
mathematics). We also included four lessons from a high
school mathematical modeling class designed by a teacher
collaborating on the project.
Two researchers independently reviewed each of the 34
activities, looking for speciﬁc practices that seemed rele-
vant to computational thinking based on our ﬁndings from
step 1. This resulted in a combined set of 208 computa-
tional thinking ‘ ‘facets’ ’ from our activity corpus. Table 2
provides a short excerpt of a portion of the coding of one of
our lessons to serve as an example of this process. The
lesson being analyzed is a physics activity that uses a
virtual roller coaster to allow students to explore the forces
and momentum that govern motion.
2 The activity has
students design experiments, gather data, analyze their
1 https://gk12northwestern.wikispaces.com/Lesson?Plans.
2 https://gk12northwestern.wikispaces.com/Roller?Coaster?Activity.
132 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
results as they explore the relationship between potential,
kinetic, and dissipated energies.
Using the set of 208 computational thinking in mathe-
matics and science facets, two researchers independently
open-coded each facet according to the computational
thinking practices involved (Column 3 of Table 2). The
process started with the set of codes derived from our
initial review of the literature (step 1). These skills were
often too broad or not tailored for mathematics and science
contexts, resulting in the division and reﬁnement of these
categories into more speciﬁc skills, as well as the intro-
duction of new codes when a facet did not ﬁt within the
exiting set of practices. Upon completion of the initial
coding, the two researchers iteratively revised the new
Fig. 1 Process followed to create the CT in Mathematics and Science Practices taxonomy
Table 1 Initial set of computational thinking skills
Initial set of computational thinking skills
1. Ability to deal with open-ended problems 6. Creating abstractions for aspects of problem at hand
2. Persistence in working through challenging problems 7. Reframing problem into a recognizable problem
3. Conﬁdence in dealing with complexity 8. Assessing strengths/weaknesses of a representation of data/representational
system
4. Representing ideas in computationally meaningful
ways
9. Generating algorithmic solutions
5. Breaking down large problems into smaller problems 10. Recognizing and addressing ambiguity in algorithms
Table 2 Example of a portion of the initial coding and ﬁnal coding for the roller coaster physics lesson
Activity Computational thinking facet Computational thinking practice
involved
Finalized taxonomy
practice
Roller coaster builder
Design a roller coaster
Graph of the coaster’s kinetic
and potential energies over
time
Students build models of roller coasters that can
be run, generating data about the coaster’s
energy
Gain insight/understanding from
computer-based
simulations/models
Using computational
model to understand a
concept
Constructing
computational models
Students record energy measurements at four
points of the track and store the data in a table
Make effective measurements
from a simulation run
Collecting data
It takes multiple iterations to build a successful
roller coaster that ﬁnishes the track and does
not crash
Iterative approach to a solution Using computational
models to ﬁnd and test
a solution
Troubleshooting and
debugging
Translating on screen graphs of potential/kinetic
energy into tabular form
Assessing strengths and
weaknesses of a representation
Manipulating data
Visualizing data
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 133
123
codes, resulting in the ﬁrst full version of our taxonomy,
which consisted of 45 distinct computational thinking in
mathematics and science practices.
Step 3 The initial set of practices was then shared with
the larger research group on the project, which collectively
undertook another round of revisions and categorized the
individual practices into distinct categories. Much of this
work focused on collapsing similar skills into new, uniﬁed
categories. Also, to obtain external validity, we consulted
with the ‘ ‘Reach for the Stars’ ’ graduate students who had
developed the lesson plans and the in-service teachers who
were participating in the project. The resulting product was
a revised list of 27 practices thematically grouped into ﬁve
high-level categories: Data and Information (6 practices),
Modeling and Simulation (5 practices), Computation (5
practices), Problem Solving (7 practices), and Systems
Thinking (4 practices). Each of these practices was linked
with a speciﬁc example of it being used in one of the
source lesson plans. Table 3 illustrates two examples of
these codes and their corresponding computational think-
ing facet from the lesson plans.
Step 4 The taxonomy was then presented to 16 high
school mathematics and science teachers during a summer
professional development workshop. As part of the work-
shop, teachers collaboratively used the taxonomy to design
new activities for their classrooms. The feedback from the
teachers on the taxonomy was generally positive, but
concerns were raised, such as a request we move from the
terms skills to the broader and more actionable practices to
reinforce what it means to use these concepts as well as to
reﬂect larger changes in the mathematics and science
standards landscape. The teachers were especially wary of
the Computation category, which included skills such as
applying conditional logic, using recursion and iterative
logic, and choosing efﬁcient data structures, as they feared
it was too close to computer science and too far from the
content they taught in their classrooms.
Along with gathering feedback from teachers, the tax-
onomy was also presented to computational thinking
experts and STEM curriculum designers. These experts
raised concerns around the problem solving category,
which included practices such as decomposing problems
into subproblems and reframing problems into known/fa-
miliar problems, as they thought the practices were too
general and not unique to STEM or computational thinking
contexts. This feedback led to another round of revisions,
during which we consolidated the Computation and prob-
lem solving categories to address the practical and theo-
retical concerns raised. The ﬁnal result of this process was
the four-category taxonomy consisting of 22 distinct
practices we present in the following section.
Step 5 Throughout the taxonomy generation process,
interviews with STEM professionals whose work relies
heavily on computation were conducted. Fifteen interviews
were carried out with academic faculty from mathematics
and science disciplines, STEM researchers in industry, and
graduate students pursing degrees in STEM disciplines.
This included interviews with biochemists, physicists,
material engineers, astrophysicists, computer scientists,
and biomedical engineers. The goal of these interviews was
to validate the taxonomy and the emerging categories as
they were taking shape, as well as to provide supplemental
data on the nature of computational thinking as it happens
in authentic scientiﬁc settings. In analyzing these inter-
views, we looked for similarities and differences in com-
putational practices across disparate forms of scientiﬁc
research. From there, we identiﬁed and characterized the
computational thinking practices that the scientiﬁc
researchers employed in their work. For example, we found
that testing and debugging was a common practice among
the scientiﬁc researchers that had not been clearly captured
in the taxonomy. Through the interviews, we learned that
the practice of debugging could be characterized differ-
ently for distinct forms of research. For instance, for a
theoretical researcher ‘ ‘testing’ ’ might involve the process
of verifying a solution to an unknown problem, whereas for
an experimental researcher, testing might involve the pro-
cess of computationally validating an experiment before
the actual trial. Thus, the description of debugging in the
taxonomy needs to reﬂect this diversity. A full analysis of
these data is presented in a forthcoming paper (Beheshti
et al. In Preparation).
The Computational Thinking in Mathematics
and Science Practices Taxonomy
Our taxonomy is broken down into four major categories:
data practices, modeling and simulation practices, com-
putational problem solving practices, and systems thinking
practices. Each of these categories is composed of a subset
of ﬁve to seven practices (Fig. 2). Following the example
set by the NGSS, we have chosen to call these ‘ ‘practices’ ’
as opposed to ‘ ‘skills’ ’ or ‘ ‘concepts’ ’ in order ‘ ‘to empha-
size that engaging in scientiﬁc investigation requires not
only skill but also knowledge that is speciﬁc to each
practice’ ’ (NGSS Lead States 2013, p. 30). Although we
present our taxonomy as a set of distinct categories, the
practices are highly interrelated and dependent on one
another. In practice, they are often used in conjunction to
achieve speciﬁc scientiﬁc and mathematical goals. In this
section, we describe each of the four major categories,
including its constituent practices and our rationale for its
inclusion in the taxonomy. In the section that follows the
presentation of the taxonomy, we present three classroom
activities to demonstrate what the practices look like in use.
134 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
Data Practices
All sciences share certain common features at the
core of their problem solving and inquiry approaches.
Chief among these is the attitude that data and evi-
dence hold a primary position in deciding any issue
(Duschl et al. 2007, p. 27)
Data lie at the heart of scientiﬁc and mathematical
pursuits. They serve many purposes, take many forms, and
play a variety of roles in the conduct of scientiﬁc inquiry.
The nature of how data are collected, created, analyzed,
and shared is rapidly changing primarily due to advance-
ments in computational technologies. ‘ ‘New technologies
enable new scientiﬁc investigations, allowing scientists to
probe realms and handle quantities of data previously
inaccessible to them’ ’ (NGSS Lead States 2013, p. 32). The
importance of being able to use these new technologies to
manage and make meaning from the large amounts of data
they produce is becoming a deﬁning feature of scientiﬁc
work in the twenty-ﬁrst century and thus critical to com-
putational thinking in mathematics and science (Foster
2006). The increasingly computational nature of working
with data in scientiﬁc and mathematical ﬁelds underscores
the importance of developing computational thinking data
practices in the classroom.
Data skills have long been a part of scientiﬁc and
mathematical standards and classroom curricula (NCTM
2000; NGSS Lead States 2013). Instruction around the use
of data often focuses on devel oping student understanding
of the role of data in investig ating questions and using
data to construct answers (Hancock et al. 1992;L e h r e r
and Romberg 1996). Part of the challenge is teaching
students that data do not come with inherent structure that
lead directly to an answer, but instead that order must be
imposed and answers drawn from the data available
(Lehrer et al. 2002). The use of data in classrooms also
includes introducing the bas ics of statistics and proba-
bility so the data can be used to draw conclusions
(Shaughnessy 2007)a sw e l la sd e v e l o p i n gﬂ u e n c yw i t h
both conventional and novel data visualizations (diSessa
2004). Increasingly, classrooms have incorporated tech-
nology as part of data collectio n and analysis instruction
using tools speciﬁcally designe d for educational contexts
such as Tinkerplots (Konold and Miller 2005), Fathom
(Finzer et al. 2001) ,S i m C a l c( R o s c h e l l ee ta l .2000), and
NetLogo (Wilensky 1999b)a sw e l la si n c o r p o r a t i n g
Table 3 Two examples of computational thinking in mathematics and science practices with their associated activities and computational facet
Category Code Activity Computational facet
Data and
information
Manipulating
data
Network science and hip hop artists a: this activity
introduces students to network sciences
Students normalize musician’s names before entering
them into a spreadsheet. Students then sort the data by
different criteria to answer questions about the dataset
Modeling
and
simulation
Assessing
model and
simulations
Projectile motion lab
b: this activity has students
generate data using the equations that describe
motion with Microsoft Excel
Students are asked how valid they think the model is—
students identify missing factors like air resistance
a https://gk12northwestern.wikispaces.com/Hip?Hop?Networks?Lesson
b https://gk12northwestern.wikispaces.com/Projectile?Lab
Fig. 2 Computational thinking
in mathematics and science
taxonomy
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 135
123
standard data analysis tool s like Microsoft Excel, SPSS,
R, and STATA.
In our analysis of computational thinking lessons for
mathematics and science classrooms, data analysis practices
were present in 27 of the 34 lessons analyzed. Additionally,
the experts we interviewed frequently referenced the impor-
tance of computational thinking with respect to the collection,
management, and analysis of data in their work. The impor-
tance of this category was highlighted in an interview with a
materials scientist, who when asked about his research
responded: ‘ ‘In almost everything, it’s just raw numerical
data.’ ’ He then went on to explain how he computationally
deﬁnes his research questions, uses supercomputing clusters
to generate data, processes and organizes data, and ﬁnally
uses software packages to generate visualizations of his
ﬁndings. In every step of his work, computational thinking
practices are essential. Below are the ﬁve computational
thinking practices that comprise the Data category.
Collecting Data
Data are collected through observation and measurement.
Computational tools play a key role in gathering and
recording a variety of data across many different scientiﬁc
and mathematical endeavors. Computational tools can be
useful in different phases of data collection, including the
design of the collection protocol, recording, and storage.
Students who have mastered this practice will be able to
propose systematic data collection protocols and articulate
how those protocols can be automated with computational
tools when appropriate.
Creating Data
In many cases, scientists and mathematicians use compu-
tational tools to generate data. This is the case when inves-
tigating phenomena that cannot be easily observed or
measured or that are more theoretical in nature. For example,
to understand galaxy evolution, astronomers generate data
using computer simulations as it is not possible to observe
and measure a galaxy’s evolution in situ because the pro-
cesses occur over billions of years. In this way, computa-
tional tools allow for data creation at scales that would
otherwise be impossible. Students who have mastered this
practice will be able to deﬁne computational procedures and
run simulations that create data they can use to advance their
understanding of the topic under investigation.
Manipulating Data
In mathematical and scientiﬁc ﬁelds, it is essential to
manipulate data in order to make meaning of them. Com-
putational tools make it possible to efﬁciently and reliably
manipulate large and complex datasets. Data manipulation
includes sorting, ﬁltering, cleaning, normalizing, and
joining disparate datasets. These manipulations serve for
both analysis and communication. Students who have
mastered this practice will be able to manipulate datasets
with computational tools, reshaping the dataset to be in a
desired or useful conﬁguration so that it can support further
investigation.
Analyzing Data
The true power of data lies in the information that can be
gleaned from them through analysis. There are many
strategies that can be employed when analyzing data for
use in a scientiﬁc or mathematical context, including
looking for patterns or anomalies, deﬁning rules to cate-
gorize data, and identifying trends and correlations. Com-
putational tools have become essential for conducting data
analysis, as they make it possible to analyze data in a more
reliable, effective manner and to conduct analysis on larger
datasets than would otherwise be possible. Using compu-
tational tools to analyze data is becoming an especially
important practice as we now live in an era of data-inten-
sive science (sometimes referred to as ‘ ‘big data’ ’), where
datasets routinely have billions of individual data points.
Students who have mastered this practice will be able to
analyze a given set of data and make claims and draw
conclusions based on the ﬁnding from their analysis.
Visualizing Data
Communicating results is an essential component of any
knowledge-building endeavor, and computational tools can
greatly facilitate that process. In mathematics and science,
creating visualizations is a powerful strategy for both
analyzing and sharing data. There are a growing number of
software tools available for designing and implementing
data visualizations (Borner 2015). These tools include both
conventional visualizations such as graphs and charts, as
well as dynamic, interactive displays that allow the
observer to interact with the data being displayed. Students
who have mastered this practice will be able to use com-
putational tools to produce visualizations that convey
information gathered during analysis.
Modeling and Simulation Practices
The sciences do not try to explain, they hardly even
try to interpret, they mainly make models.
(von Neumann 1955, p. 628)
The ability to create, reﬁne, and use models of phe-
nomena is a central practice for scientists and
136 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
mathematicians (NGSS Lead States 2013). In mathematics
and science, models can include ﬂowcharts, diagrams,
equations, chemical formulae, computer simulations, and
even physical models (Harrison, and Treagust 2000). By
deﬁnition, models are simpliﬁcations of reality that fore-
ground certain features of a phenomenon while approxi-
mating or ignoring other features. As such, ‘ ‘all models are
wrong, but some are useful’ ’ (Box and Draper 1987,
p. 424). The usefulness of a model comes from its
explanatory and/or predictive power and much research has
found model-based learning to be an effective pedagogical
strategy (for a review, see Louca and Zacharia 2012).
Science education is considered to be inseparably inter-
twined with the development of epistemic and representa-
tional practices (Kaput 1998; Lehrer and Schauble 2006;
Wilensky and Papert 2010; Wilkerson-Jerde et al. 2015),
yet these practices are rarely made explicit as part of
instruction. Similar calls have been made of mathematics
education. The NGSS and Common Core Mathematics
Standards place a new emphasis on not only using models,
but also creating models and critically interrogating their
limitations and simplifying assumptions.
Computational models and simulations can make sci-
entiﬁc concepts more accessible and enhance student
understanding of phenomena (Buckley et al. 2004; Klopfer
2003; Parnafes 2007; Schwarz et al. 2007; White and
Frederiksen 1998; Wilensky 1997; Wilkerson-Jerde and
Wilensky 2015). By computational models, we refer to
non-static representations of phenomena that can be sim-
ulated by a computer. The pedagogical power of compu-
tational models comes not just from students using existing
models, but also from enabling students to design, build,
and assess models of their own (Brady et al. 2015; Gilbert
2004; Penner 2000; White 1993; Wilensky 1995, 2003;
Wilensky and Reisman 2006; Wilkerson-Jerde et al. 2015).
Further, computational models make it possible to inves-
tigate questions and test hypotheses that would otherwise
be too expensive, dangerous, difﬁcult or entirely not pos-
sible to carry out (NRC 2011a). As with non-computational
models, it is important for students to be able to think
critically about computational models to understand their
capabilities and limitations.
Of the 34 computational thinking in mathematics and
science activities we analyzed, 23 included the use of
computational models in various capacities including as
tools for problem solving (7) and as tools for exploring
concepts (17). Additionally, these activities had learners
design, construct, and evaluate models as part of their
educational activities. Our modeling and simulation cate-
gory consists of ﬁve computational thinking in mathemat-
ics and science practices.
Using Computational Models to Understand a Concept
Computational models that demonstrate speciﬁc ideas or
phenomena can serve as powerful learning tools. Students
can use computational models to deepen their understand-
ing of mathematical and scientiﬁc concepts, such as the
interdependence within ecosystems, how objects move in a
frictionless environment, and probabilistic distributions of
random events. Such tools help support the inquiry process
by recreating phenomena in environments that support
systematic investigation and give the user far more control
than would be possible in the natural world. Students who
have mastered this practice will be able to advance their
own understanding of a concept by interacting with a
computational model that demonstrates the concept.
Using Computational Models to Find and Test Solutions
Computational models can also be used to test hypotheses
and discover solutions to problems. They make it possible
to test many different solutions quickly, easily, and inex-
pensively before committing to a speciﬁc approach. This is
especially helpful for phenomena whose outcomes depend
on multi-dimensional ‘ ‘parameter spaces.’ ’ This is an
important technique, commonly used when investigating
problems in scientiﬁc ﬁelds and beyond. Students who have
mastered this practice will be able to ﬁnd, test, and justify
the use of a particular solution through the use of a com-
putational model as well as be able to apply the information
gained through using the model when appropriate.
Assessing Computational Models
A key practice in using a computational model effectively
is to understand how the model relates to the phenomenon
being represented. This understanding is guided by a
variety of questions including: Which aspects of the phe-
nomenon have been faithfully modeled and which aspects
have been simpliﬁed or ignored? What assumptions have
the creators of the model made about the world and how do
those assumptions affect its behavior? What layers of
abstraction have been built into the model itself and how do
these abstractions shape the ﬁdelity of the model? Thinking
about these questions is an important part of validating and
calibrating a model with respect to the real-world phe-
nomena being represented. Students who have mastered
this practice will be able to articulate the similarities and
differences between a computational model and the phe-
nomenon that it is modeling, this includes raising issues of
threats to validity as well as identifying assumptions built
into the model.
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 137
123
Designing Computational Models
Part of taking advantage of computational power in the
scientiﬁc disciplines is designing new models that can be run
on a computational device. The process of designing a model
is distinct from actually implementing it; designing a model
involves making technological, methodological, and con-
ceptual decisions. There are many reasons that might
motivate designing a computational model, including
wanting to better understand a phenomenon under investi-
gation, to test out a hypothesis, or to communicate an idea or
principle to others in a dynamic, interactive way. When
designing a computational model, one is confronted with a
large set of decisions including deﬁning the boundaries of
the system, deciding what should be included and what can
be ignored, and conceptualizing the behaviors and properties
of the elements included in the model. Throughout the
design process, one must ensure that the resulting model will
be able to accomplish the goal that initially motivated the
model design process. Students who have mastered this
practice will be able to design a computational model, a
process that includes deﬁning the components of the model,
describing how they interact, deciding what data will be
produced by the model, articulating assumptions being made
by the proposed model, and understanding what conclusions
can be drawn from the model.
Constructing Computational Models
An important practice in scientiﬁc and mathematical pur-
suits is the ability to create new or extend existing compu-
tational models. This requires being able to encode the
model features in a way that a computer can interpret.
Sometimes this takes the form of conventional program-
ming, but in other cases, frameworks and tools support the
user in deﬁning behaviors or features through manipulating
graphical interfaces or deﬁning sets of rules to be followed.
Being able to implement modeling ideas is critical for
advancing ideas beyond the work done by others and com-
plements the previous practice of designing computational
models. Students who have mastered this practice will be
able to implement new model behaviors, either through
extending an existing model or by creating a new model
either within a given modeling framework or from scratch.
Computational Problem Solving Practice
Applied computer science is now playing the role
which mathematics did from the seventeenth through
the twentieth centuries: providing an orderly, formal
framework and exploratory apparatus for other
sciences.
(Djorgovski 2005)
As with much of human endeavor, problem solving is
central to scientiﬁc and mathematical inquiry. While
problem solving can take many forms, in this work, we
focus on problem solving practices that are especially
effective for working with computational tools and derived
from the ﬁeld of computer science. This perspective builds
on work looking at problem solving practices generally
(Newell and Simon 1972;P o´lya 1954), the power of
computational tools to foster the development of such
strategies (Clements and Gullo 1984; Palumbo 1990;
Papert 1980), and work that brings problem solving and
computational tools into scientiﬁc domains (Guzdial 1994;
Hambrusch et al. 2009; Sengupta et al. 2013; Wilensky
2001; Wilensky et al. 2014).
This category, more so than the others, builds on prac-
tices and strategies from the ﬁeld of computer science, and
is intended to capture the ﬁeld’s contribution to contem-
porary scientiﬁc and mathematical work and the impor-
tance for today’s students to develop this skillset (ACM
Pathways 2013; Augustine 2005; Guzdial and Soloway
2003; Henderson et al. 2007). Research has found that
enabling students to explore scientiﬁc and mathematical
phenomena using computational problem solving practices
such as programming, algorithm development, and creating
computational abstractions can help learners develop deep
understandings of mathematical and scientiﬁc phenomena
(Jackson et al. 1994; Sherin et al. 1993; Taub et al. 2015;
Wilensky 1995; Wilkerson-Jerde 2014).
While relatively few of the lesson plans we analyzed
would ﬁt into a conventional computer science curriculum,
many of the activities include concepts that draw on central
practices from the ﬁeld, including developing algorithms (5
lessons), programming (12 lessons), and working with
computational abstractions (8 lessons). Additionally, many
of the scientists and mathematicians we interviewed ref-
erenced practices from this category including program-
ming, using computational abstractions, and the
importance of being able to choose effective computational
tools. From this analysis, the resulting Computational
problem solving category consists of seven practices
intended to lay the groundwork in support of preparing
learners for the critical thinking with computation that is
becoming central to modern science and mathematics.
Preparing Problems for Computational Solutions
While some problems naturally lend themselves to com-
putational solutions, more often, problems must be
reframed so that existing computational tools—be they
physical devices or software packages—can be utilized. In
the sciences, a vast array of computational tools can be
138 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
employed for a given pursuit; the challenge is to map
problems onto the capabilities of the tools. Strategies for
doing this include decomposing problems into subprob-
lems, reframing new problems into known problems for
which computational tools already exist, and simplifying
complex problems so the mapping of problem features onto
computational solutions is more accessible. Students who
have mastered this practice will be able to employ such
strategies toward reframing problems into forms that can
be solved, or at least progress can be made, through the use
of computational tools.
Computer Programming
The ability to encode instructions in such a way that a
computer can execute them is a powerful skill for inves-
tigating and solving mathematical and scientiﬁc problems.
Programs ranging from ten-line Python scripts to multi-
million-line C ?? libraries can be valuable for data col-
lection and analysis, visualizing information, building and
extending computational models, and interfacing with
other existing computational tools. This practice consists of
understanding and modifying programs written by others,
as well as composing new programs or scripts from scratch.
This category includes understanding programming con-
cepts such as conditional logic, iterative logic, and recur-
sion as well as creating abstractions such as subroutines
and data structures. While it is not reasonable to expect all
students to be programming experts, basic programming
proﬁciency is an important component of twenty-ﬁrst
century scientiﬁc inquiry. Students who have mastered this
practice will be able to understand, modify, and create
computer programs and use these skills to advance their
own scientiﬁc and mathematical pursuits.
Choosing Effective Computational Tools
A single task can often be solved a number of different
ways using a variety of different computational tools. In
such cases, there is often a single tool, or at least a small
subset of tools, for the job. Being able to identify the
strengths and weaknesses of various possible tools for the
problem at hand can be the most important decision in a
project. Choosing an effective computational tool includes
considering the functionality it provides, its scope and
customizability, the type of data the tools expects and can
produce, as well as questions that extend beyond the soft-
ware itself, such as, whether or not there is an active user
community that could assist with difﬁculties you might
encounter. Students who have mastered this practice will
be able to articulate the pros and cons of using various
computational tools and be able to make an informed,
justiﬁable decision.
Assessing Different Approaches/Solutions to a Problem
When there are multiple approaches to solving a problem
or multiple solutions to choose from, it is important to be
able to assess the options and make an informed decision
about which route to follow. This practice is distinct from
the previous practice in that it concerns how computational
tools, once chosen, will be used, and how they ﬁt in with
the larger process of approaching and solving problems.
This is important in science and mathematics, as there is
often more than one possible course of action. Even if two
different approaches produce the same, correct result, there
are other dimensions that should be considered when
choosing a solution or approach, such as cost, time, dura-
bility, extendibility, reusability, and ﬂexibility. Students
who have mastered this practice will be able to assess
different approaches/solutions to a problem based on the
requirements and constraints of the problem and the
available resources and tools.
Developing Modular Computational Solutions
When working toward a speciﬁc scientiﬁc or mathematical
outcome, there are often a number of steps or components
involved in the process; these steps, in turn, can be broken
down in a variety of ways that impact their ability to be
easily reused, repurposed, and debugged. Elements of a
solution can be large, complicated and uniquely designed
for the problem at hand, or they can be small, modular, and
reusable. Developing computational solutions in a modu-
lar, reusable way has many implications for both the
immediate problem and future problems that may be
encountered. By developing modular solutions, it is easier
to incrementally construct solutions, test components
independently, and increase the likelihood that components
will be useful for future problems. Students who have
mastered this practice will be able to develop solutions that
consist of modular, reusable components and take advan-
tage of the modularity of their solution in both working on
the current problem and reusing pieces of previous solu-
tions when confronting new challenges.
Creating Computational Abstractions
Creating an abstraction requires the ability to conceptualize
and then represent an idea or a process in more general
terms by foregrounding the important aspects of the idea
while backgrounding less important features. The ability to
create and use abstractions is used constantly across
mathematical and scientiﬁc undertakings, be it creating
computational abstractions when writing a program, gen-
erating visualizations of data to communicate an idea or
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 139
123
ﬁnding, deﬁning the scope or scale of a problem, or cre-
ating models to further explore or understand a given
phenomenon. Creating computational abstractions is
essential for solving multiple problems that have structural
similarity but differ in surface detail. These practices are
one central way computational power can be brought to
bear on mathematic and scientiﬁc problems. Students who
have mastered this practice will be able to identify, create,
and use computational abstractions as they work toward
scientiﬁc and mathematical goals.
Troubleshooting and Debugging
Troubleshooting broadly refers to the process of ﬁguring
out why something is not working or behaving as expected.
There are a number of strategies one can employ while
troubleshooting a problem, including clearly identifying
the issue, systematically testing the system to isolate the
source of the error, and reproducing the problem so that
potential solutions can be tested reliably. In computer
science, this activity is often referred to as ‘ ‘debugging,’ ’
and there are a number of strategies and tools designed
speciﬁcally to help with ﬁguring out why a program or
other computational tool is not behaving as expected. In
STEM ﬁelds, the ability to troubleshoot a problem is
important, as unexpected outcomes and incorrect behavior
are frequently encountered, especially when working with
computational tools. Students who have mastered this
practice will be able to identify, isolate, reproduce, and
ultimately correct unexpected problems encountered when
working on a problem, and do so in a systematic, efﬁcient
manner.
Systems Thinking Practices
Instead of looking at one thing at a time, and noting
its behavior when exposed to one other thing, the
sciences now look at a number of different and
interacting things and note their behavior as a whole
under diverse inﬂuences.
(Laszlo 1996,p .4 )
So many of the important problems that we face today
are complex, involving multiple variables, numerous direct
and indirect effects, and are comprised of many, interde-
pendent parts. ‘ ‘The ability to think systemically is an
important habit of mind that supports not only the scientiﬁc
background of the developing STEM workforce, but also
future scientiﬁcally literate citizens. In a global society
where future large-scale, scientiﬁcally based decisions will
need to be made, it is important for the general populous to
develop a systems thinking orientation toward the world’ ’
(Duschl and Bismack 2013, p. 120). The systems thinking
approach is fundamentally different from traditional forms
of problem solving and focuses on understanding how
systems change over time (Forrester 1968). The systems
thinking approach has had two distinct foci, with one focus
on aggregate systems dynamics (Forrester 1968; Sterman
2000) and the other on agent-based dynamics (Epstein and
Axtell 1996; Grimm et al. 2005; Wilensky and Resnick
1999; Wilensky and Rand 2015). Both kinds of systems
exhibit emergent behaviors (Bar-Yam 2003; Jacobson and
Wilensky 2006; Sterman 2000; Wilensky and Resnick
1999). With the emergence of so many challenges related
to big data, many systems thinking methods have become
critical components of computational thinking approaches
practiced across scientiﬁc disciplines. Traditional analyses
focus on breaking down problems into their constituent
parts and looking separately at the individual pieces. Sys-
tems thinking analyses, in contrast, focus on an inclusive
examination of how the system and its constituent parts
interact and relate to one another as a whole (Assaraf and
Orion 2005).
Many fundamental (and difﬁcult) scientiﬁc concepts are
best, and perhaps only, understood through a systems lens.
Good examples include natural selection and population
dynamics in ecology, the human respiratory system from
biology, and the ideal gas laws in chemistry and physics
(Hmelo et al. 2000; Stieff and Wilensky 2003; Wilensky and
Reisman 2006). Other types of systems, such as those
encountered in physics, economics, and even history,
involve cross-cutting concepts related to systems thinking
such as feedback, emergence, stocks, and ﬂows (Goldstone
and Wilensky 2008; Penner 2000; Wilensky and Rand 2015;
Zuckerman and Resnick 2003). Recommendations for the
systems perspective are now represented in four separate
NRC reports— Taking Science to School (NRC 2007), A
Framework for K -12 Science Education (NRC 2012a), Ed-
ucation for Life and Work (NRC 2012c) and Discipline-
Based Education Research (NRC 2012b) as well as the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States 2013).
While this knowledge is not necessarily bound to compu-
tational thinking, computational tools enable new ways to
explore, understand, and represent these ideas (Bar-Yam
2003; Sterman 2000; Wolfram 2002). Computation there-
fore serves as a powerful medium to make these ideas
accessible to learners (Klopfer 2003; Wilensky 2001).
In our analysis of computational thinking activities
designed for high school mathematics and science classes,
eight lessons included developing practices associated with
systems thinking. These ﬁndings were reinforced by the
interviews we conducted with scientists and mathemati-
cians, as they frequently cited concepts from complex
systems and practices associated with investigating and
understanding systems through computation as being
important in their ﬁeld. While many of the computational
140 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
practices that we describe above are valuable for investi-
gating systems, this section introduces ﬁve computational
thinking practices that focus on systems thinking.
Investigating a Complex System as a Whole
A system can be viewed as a single entity composed of
many interrelated elements; for some questions, it is more
effective to investigate how the system works as a whole as
opposed to studying each individual element or set of
elements. Investigating a complex system as a whole relies
on the ability to deﬁne and measure inputs and outputs of
the system. This is especially critical in the sciences
because so many phenomena are the result of very large-
scale, complex interactions. Being able to black box the
details of the underlying systematic interactions and focus
on the system as a whole makes it possible to understand
the characteristics of the system in aggregate, which is
sometimes exactly the data needed for the problem at hand.
Computational tools such as models and simulations are
especially useful in such investigations, as they can auto-
mate pieces of an investigation, take precise measurements,
and model systems for further analysis and hypothesis
testing. Another powerful approach to facilitate students in
learning about complex systems as whole can come from
the use of representations (including feedback, stocks and
ﬂows, agents, and agent rules) that depict systems in a
nonlinear fashion. Students who have mastered this prac-
tice will be able to pose questions about, design and carry
out investigations on, and ultimately interpret and make
sense of, the data gathered about a system as a single entity.
Understanding the Relationships within a System
Whereas some questions can best be answered by focusing
on a system as a whole, other questions require under-
standing how the components within a system interact.
Thus, it is important to be able to identify the different
elements of a system and articulate the nature of their
interactions. Computational tools are useful for conducting
such inquiry as they can provide learners with controls for
isolating different elements, investigating their behaviors,
and exploring how they interact with other components of
the system. Students who have mastered this practice will
be able to identify the constituent elements of a system,
articulate their behaviors, and explain how interactions
between elements produce the characteristic behaviors of
the system.
Thinking in Levels
Systems can be understood and analyzed from different
perspectives, ranging from a micro-level view that
considers the smallest elements of the system to a macro-
level view that considers the system as a whole. Thinking
about a system from the standpoint of its individual actors
and components can lead to insights about how micro-level
behaviors lead to emergent macro-level patterns. On the
other hand, being able to black box the details of the
underlying systematic interactions and focus on the system
as a whole makes it possible to understand the emergent
characteristics of the system in aggregate, which can yield
a different set of insights from a micro-level analysis.
Computational tools can facilitate the investigation of the
system from both perspectives, and, as Levy and Wilensky
(2008) show, from productive mid-levels between the two.
Students who have mastered this practice will be able to
identify different levels of a given system, articulate the
behavior of each level with respect to the system as a
whole, and be able to move back and forth between levels,
correctly attributing features of the system to the appro-
priate level.
Communicating Information about a System
A central challenge when investigating a system is ﬁguring
out how best to communicate what you have learned about
it. This is often challenging due to the size and complexity
of the system under investigation. Because systems often
consist of many interrelated parts and can include numer-
ous interacting elements, conveying information about the
system can be difﬁcult, but is also essential for the infor-
mation gleaned from the system to be understood and used
by others. Communicating information about a system
often involves developing effective and accessible visual-
izations and infographics
3 that highlight the most important
aspects of what has been learned about the system in such a
way that it can be understood by someone who does not
know all the underlying details. This practice includes the
ability to prioritize features of a system, design intuitive
ways to represent it, and identify what can be left out of the
visualization without compromising the information being
conveyed. Students who have mastered this practice will be
able to communicate information they have learned about a
system in a way that makes the information accessible to
viewers who do not know the exact details of the system
from which the information was drawn.
3 By infographic, we mean a visual abstraction that communicates
information. It includes conventional formats such as graphs, charts,
and maps, but also includes interactive, dynamic visualizations
designed with the express goal of communicating information to the
viewer.
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 141
123
Deﬁning Systems and Managing Complexity
Anything can be viewed as a system; the size and membership
of the system depends on where you deﬁne its boundaries.
You can have very small systems that include only a narrow
set of entities, like a classroom system consisting of a teacher
and students, or you can have systems that include millions of
entities, like a group of galaxies or the human genome. The
larger the system is, in terms of number of entities, types of
entities, frequency of interactions, and diversity of behavior,
the more complex it becomes. The decision of where to set the
boundaries of the system is critical for any investigation that
follows as it determines what questions you can answer as
well as the size and complexity of the system. Further, in
order to leverage computational tools in working with sys-
tems, one must explicitly delineate the boundaries of the
systems that are under investigation. It is important to be able
to deﬁne a system in a way that is useful and productive. This
includes creating a system that includes all the necessary
elements to be able to accomplish the desired goal while
limiting its size, complexity, and scope. Students who have
mastered this practice will be able to deﬁne the boundaries of
a system so that they can then use the resulting system as a
domain for investigating a speciﬁc question as well as to
identify ways to simplify an existing system without com-
promising its ability to be used for a speciﬁed purpose.
Computational Thinking in Mathematics
and Science in Practice
As part of our effort to bring computational thinking into
mathematics and science classrooms, we are developing a
series of computational thinking enhanced lesson plans for
high school mathematics, biology, chemistry, and physics
classrooms. These activities are informed by our taxonomy,
introduced in professional development workshops, and
taught by teachers without formal backgrounds in compu-
tational thinking or computer science. The activities have
been designed to be easily adopted and incorporated into
existing mathematics and science curricula. Here we present
three lessons that demonstrate the computational thinking in
mathematics and science (CT-MS) practices outlined in our
taxonomy.
4
Video Games: Physics Phact or Phiction?
This activity is designed for high school physics class-
rooms and has students investigate the laws of physics that
govern video games. Depending on the selected game,
students calculate the gravitational constant (e.g., in Angry
Birds) and/or conservation of energy and momentum (e.g.,
in Asteroids). The lesson begins with students creating a
20- to 30-s screencast of themselves playing the game, then
use Physics Tracker (Brown 2013), a video transcription
and computational analysis tool, to collect data (CT-MS
Practice: Data Collection). Within Physics Tracker, the
students visualize the data, plotting time, position, velocity,
acceleration, and other germane physical parameters (CT-
MS Practice: Data Visualization). They then use Tracker’s
analysis tools to identify the best ﬁt between the data and
their mathematical functional form (CT-MS Practice: Data
Analysis). Students derive the properties that deﬁne the
behavior of the world, such as ﬁnding the gravitational
constant in Angry Birds (CT-MS Practice: Using Compu-
tational Models to Find/Test Solutions). Having answered
this question, students assess the video game as a model,
identify differences with the real world, and communicate
why those design choices help the usability of the game
(CT-MS Practices: Assessing Computational Models,
Communicating Information about a System).
DNA Sequencing from the Ground Up
This activity is designed for high school biology class-
rooms and has students imagine that they are scientists in
the 1990s faced with the task of sequencing the entire
human genome. Students start with a simple case of putting
back together a verse of a familiar song that has been
broken into pieces and randomly arranged. After reﬂecting
on this puzzle and the strategies that they developed to
reassemble the lyrics (CT-MS Practice: Assessing Differ-
ent Approach/Solutions to a Problem), students go on to a
more difﬁcult challenge: reconstructing an unknown pass-
word with an unfamiliar combination of letters and num-
bers. They then apply their technique from the password
puzzle to derive an efﬁcient, robust, and general algorithm
for sequencing things (CT-MS Practices: Preparing Prob-
lems for Computational Solutions, Creating Computational
Abstractions). After determining their technique for
assembling the full DNA sequence, the students write their
procedure in pseudocode, intended to be the ﬁrst step
toward expressing the algorithm in a manner that a com-
puter could interpret and execute (CT-MS Practice: Pro-
gramming). Classmates then swap algorithms, attempt to
implement them, and provide suggestions for improvement
in terms of clarity and efﬁciency (CT-MS Practice:
Assessing Different Approaches/Solutions to a Problem).
At the end of the lesson, the students are asked to consider
why computers were so essential in accomplishing the task
of sequencing the human genome. By having them think
about and experience scaling the problem up from a simple
case to a more complex problem, the students develop an
4 Additional information on the lesson plans, including materials and
software, can be found at http://ct-stem.northwestern.edu
142 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
appreciation for the processing speed that computers pro-
vide and how computation has revolutionized the questions
we ask and the way we do science.
Gas Laws
In this high school chemistry lesson, students use an
interactive simulation to explore the relationships between
macroscopic properties of gases—pressure, volume, and
temperature—based on how these properties emerge from
microscopic interactions (i.e., the motion of the gas parti-
cles and the interaction with the walls of the container).
The tool is part of the PhET suite of simulations (Adams
et al. 2008a, b) that has been found to help students build
conceptual understandings of the concepts being modeled
(CT-MS Practice: Using Computational Models to
Understand a Concept) and is based on the earlier GasLab
modeling toolkit (Wilensky 1999a). Students explore the
behaviors of gases by running experiments, the result of
which are stored in a spreadsheet (CT-MS Practice:
Creating Data). The students then visualize their data,
graphing it in various formats to ﬁnd the most compelling
way to explain the relationship between the variables to
classmates (CT-MS Practices: Analyzing Data, Visualizing
Data). The simulation allows the students to investigate
both the microscopic, agent-level behaviors and macro-
scopic, aggregate properties of gases (CT-MS Practice:
Thinking in Levels). At the end of the lesson, students are
asked whether there are aspects of the simulation that are
unrealistic or different from the real world. Students are
also asked to reﬂect on the difference between exploring
the gas laws with models versus trying to conduct
table experiments (CT-MS Practice: Assessing Computa-
tional Models). To derive the gas laws themselves, the
students must consider the system as a whole, back-
grounding the details of the underlying interactions and
focusing on identifying and measuring inputs to and out-
puts from the aggregate system (CT-MS Practice: Investi-
gating a Complex System as a Whole).
Conclusion
This paper argues for the inclusion of computational
thinking in mathematics and science classrooms. We see
three main beneﬁts for the approach of embedding com-
putational thinking in these contexts: (1) it builds on the
reciprocal relationship for learning between computational
thinking and mathematics and science domains, (2) it
addresses practical concerns of reaching all students, and
having proﬁcient teachers, and (3) it brings science and
mathematics education more in line with current profes-
sional practices in these ﬁelds. We have presented a
taxonomy that articulates a deﬁnition of ‘ ‘computational
thinking in mathematics and science’ ’ and contributes a
language around which standards, curricula, and assess-
ments can develop. In so doing, we address the issue of
ambiguity and a lack of precision that has plagued much of
the discussion surrounding computational thinking. We see
the work presented in this paper as a ﬁrst step in the process
of bringing computational thinking into mathematics and
science classrooms. Achieving this goal requires the sup-
port of a diverse set of stakeholders to be successful. This
includes teachers becoming comfortable teaching the
material and receiving professional development in com-
putation-based lessons and technology; school administra-
tors allocating resources to support its inclusion; policy
makers prioritizing computational thinking as a part of
mathematics and science education; curriculum and
assessment developers producing computational thinking
materials targeted for science and mathematics classrooms;
and the broader community supporting the effort to bring
computational thinking into these educational spaces. The
inclusion of computational thinking as a core scientiﬁc
practice in the Next Generation Science Standards and
similar language in mathematics’ standards are important
milestones, but there is still much work to do toward
addressing the challenge of educating a technologically and
scientiﬁcally savvy population and preparing the next
generation of world class scientists.
Acknowledgments This work is supported by the National Science
Foundation under NSF Grant CNS-1138461. However, any opinions,
ﬁndings, conclusions, and/or recommendations are those of the
investigators and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
Foundation.
References
Abrahamson D, Wilensky U (2005) ProbLab goes to school: design,
teaching, and learning of probability with multi-agent interactive
computer models. In: Proceedings of the fourth conference of the
European Society for research in mathematics education. San
Feliu de Gixols
Abrahamson D, Janusz RM, Wilensky U (2006) There once was a
9-block: a middle-school design for probability and statistics.
J Stat Educ 14(1). http://www.amstat.org/publications/jse/v14n1/
abrahamson.html
Adams WK, Reid S, LeMaster R, McKagan SB, Perkins KK, Dubson
M, Wieman CE (2008a) A study of educational simulations part
I: engagement and Learning. J Interact Learn Res 19(3):367–419
Adams WK, Reid S, LeMaster R, McKagan SB, Perkins KK, Dubson
M, Wieman CE (2008b) A study of educational simulations part
II: interface design. J Interact Learn Res 19(4):551–557
Anderson MP, Srolovitz DJ, Grest GS, Sahni PS (1984) Computer
simulation of grain growth—I: kinetics. Acta Metall
32(5):783–791
Assaraf OB-Z, Orion N (2005) Development of system thinking skills
in the context of earth system education. J Res Sci Teach
42(5):518–560
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 143
123
Astrachan O, Briggs A (2012) The CS principles project. CM Inroads
3(2):38–42
Augustine NR (2005) Rising above the gathering storm: energizing
and employing America for a brighter economic future. National
Academies Press, Washington, DC
Bailey D, Borwein JM (2011) Exploratory experimentation and
computation. Not Am Math Soc 58(10):1410–1419
Barab S, Thomas M, Dodge T, Carteaux R, Tuzun H (2005) Making
learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a game without guns. Educ Technol
Res Dev 53(1):86–107
Barr V, Stephenson C (2011) Bringing computational thinking to
K-12: what is Involved and what is the role of the computer
science education community? ACM Inroads 2(1):48–54
Bar-Yam Y (2003) Dynamics of complex systems. Perseus Publish-
ing, New York
Beheshti E, Weintrop D, Horn MS, Orton K, Jona K, Wilensky U (In
Preparation) Computational thinking in the wild: how scientists
and mathematicians use computational thinking in their work.
Blikstein P (2013) Digital fabrication and ‘ ‘making’ ’ in education: the
democratization of invention. In: Walter-Herrmann J, Bu¨ching C
(eds) FabLabs: of machines, makers and inventors, Transcript
Publishers, Bielefeld, pp 1–21
Blikstein P, Wilensky U (2009) An atom is known by the company it
keeps: a constructionist learning environment for materials
science using agent-based modeling. Int J Comput Math Learn
14(2):81–119
Borner K (2015) Atlas of knowledge: anyone can map. MIT Press,
Cambridge
Box GE, Draper NR (1987) Empirical model-building and response
surfaces. Wiley, New York
Brady C, Holbert N, Soylu F, Novak M, Wilensky U (2015)
Sandboxes for model-based inquiry. J Sci Educ Technol
24(2):265–286
Brown D (2013) Tracker: video analysis and modeling tool (Version
4.82). http://www.cabrillo.edu/*dbrown/tracker
Brennan K, Resnick M (2012). New frameworks for studying and
assessing the development of computational thinking. Presented
at the American Education Researcher Association, Vancouver,
Canada.
Bryan J (2006) Technology for physics instruction. Contemp Issues
Technol Teach Educ 6(2):230
Buckley BC, Gobert JD, Kindﬁeld ACH, Horwitz P, Tinker RF,
Gerlits B et al (2004) Model-based teaching and learning with
BioLogica
TM: what do they learn? how do they learn? how do
we know? J Sci Educ Technol 13(1):23–41
Buechley L, Eisenberg M, Catchen J, Crockett A (2008) The LilyPad
Arduino: using computational textiles to investigate engagement,
aesthetics, and diversity in computer science education. In:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems. ACM, New York, pp 423–432
Chinn CA, Malhotra BA (2002) Epistemologically authentic inquiry
in schools: a theoretical framework for evaluating inquiry tasks.
Sci Educ 86(2):175–218
Clements DH, Gullo DF (1984) Effects of computer programming on
young children’s cognition. J Educ Psychol 76(6):1051
Computer Science Teachers Association (2011) K-12 computer
science standards. http://csta.acm.org/Curriculum/sub/K12Stan
dards.html
Confrey J (1993) The role of technology in reconceptualizing
functions and algebra. Paper presented at the 17th Annual
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the International
Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education, Asilomar
Cooper S, Dann W, Pausch R (2000) Alice: a 3-D tool for
introductory programming concepts. J Comput Sci Coll
15(5):107–116
Dijkstra HA (2013) Nonlinear climate dynamics. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
diSessa AA (2000) Changing minds: computers, learning, and
literacy. MIT Press, Cambridge
diSessa AA (2004) Metarepresentation: native competence and
targets for instruction. Cogn Instr 22(3):293–331
Driscoll DP (2013) Technology and engineering literacy framework
for the 2014 National Assessment of Educational Progress. US
Department of Education, Washington DC
Duschl RA, Bismack AS (2013) Standards for science education:
quantitative reasoning and modeling concepts. In: Duschl RA,
Bismack AS (eds) Reconceptualizing STEM education: the
central role of practices. University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY
Duschl RA, Schweingruber HA, Shouse AW (2007) Taking science
to school: learning and teaching science in grades K-8. National
Academies Press, Washington, DC
Edelson DC, Gordin DN, Pea RD (1999) Addressing the challenges of
inquiry-based learning through technology and curriculum
design. J Learn Sci 8(3/4):391–450
Eisenberg M (2002) Output devices, computation, and the future of
mathematical crafts. Int J Comput Math Learn 7(1):1–44
Epstein J, Axtell R (1996) Growing artiﬁcal societies: social science
from the bottom up. Brookings Institution Press, Washington
Feurzeig W, Papert S, Lawler B (2011) Programming-languages as a
conceptual framework for teaching mathematics. Interact Learn
Environ 19(5):487–501
Finzer W, Erickson T, Binker J (2001) Fathom [computer software].
KCP Technologies, Emeryville
Forrester JW (1968) Principles of systems. Pegasus Communications,
Waltham, MA
Foster I (2006) 2020 computing: a two-way street to science’s future.
Nature 440(7083):419
Furber S (2012) Shut down or restart? The way forward for
computing in UK schools. Technical report, The Royal Society,
London
Gardner DP (1983) A nation at risk: the imperative for educational
reform. U.S. Department of Education, Washington, DC
Gilbert JK (2004) Models and modelling: routes to more authentic
science education. Int J Sci Math Educ 2(2):115–130
Goldstone RL, Wilensky U (2008) Promoting transfer by grounding
complex systems principles. J Learn Sci 17(4):465–516
Google: Exploring Computational Thinking. (n.d.). Retrieved 25 Oct
2010. http://www.google.com/edu/computational-thinking/
index.html
Grimm Volker, Revilla Eloy, Berger Uta, Jeltsch Florian, Mooij Wolf
M, Railsback Steven F, Thulke Hans-Hermann, Weiner Jacob,
Wiegand Thorsten, DeAngelis Donald L (2005) Pattern-oriented
modeling of agent-based complex systems: lessons from ecol-
ogy. Science 310:987–991
Grover S, Pea R (2013) Computational thinking in K-12: a review of
the state of the ﬁeld. Educ Res 42(1):38–43
Guzdial M (1994) Software-realized scaffolding to facilitate pro-
gramming for science learning. Interact Learn Environ
4(1):001–044
Guzdial M (2008) Paving the way for computational thinking.
Commun ACM 51(8):25–27
Guzdial M, Soloway E (2003) Computer science is more important
than calculus: the challenge of living up to our potential.
SIGCSE Bull 35(2):5–8
Hambrusch S, Hoffmann C, Korb JT, Haugan M, Hosking AL (2009)
A multidisciplinary approach towards computational thinking for
science majors. In: ACM SIGCSE bulletin, vol 41, pp 183–187
Hancock C, Kaput JJ, Goldsmith LT (1992) Authentic inquiry with
data: critical barriers to classroom implementation. Educ Psychol
27(3):337
144 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
Harrison AG, Treagust DF (2000) A typology of school science
models. Int J Sci Educ 22(9):1011–1026
Henderson PB, Cortina TJ, Wing JM (2007) Computational thinking.
In: ACM SIGCSE bulletin, vol 39. ACM, pp 195–196
Hmelo CE, Holton DL, Kolodner JL (2000) Designing to learn about
complex systems. J Learn Sci 9(3):247–298. doi: 10.1207/
S15327809JLS0903_2
Horn MS, Brady C, Hjorth A, Wagh A, Wilensky U (2014) Frog
pond: a code-ﬁrst learning environment on evolution and natural
selection. ACM Press, New York, pp 357–360
Horwitz P, Schwartz J, Kindﬁeld ACH, Yessis LM, Hickey DT,
Heidenberg A, Wolfe EW (1998) Implementation and evaluation
of the GenScope TM learning environment: issues, solutions, and
results. In: Guzdial M, Kolodner J, Bruckman A (eds) Proceed-
ings of the 3rd annual international conference of the learning
sciences. Association for the Advancement of Computers in
Education, Charlottesville
Jackson SL, Stratford SJ, Krajcik J, Soloway E (1994) Making
dynamic modeling accessible to precollege science students.
Interact Learn Environ 4(3):233–257
Jacobson MJ, Wilensky U (2006) Complex systems in education:
scientiﬁc and educational importance and implications for the
learning sciences. J Learn Sci 15(1):11–34
Jona K, Vondracek M (2013) A remote radioactivity experiment.
Phys Teach 51(1):25
Jona K, Wilensky U, Trouille L, Horn MS, Orton K, Weintrop D,
Beheshti E (2014) Embedding computational thinking in
science, technology, engineering, and math (CT-STEM). Pre-
sented at the Future Directions in Computer Science Education
Summit Meeting, Orlando
Kaput JJ (1998) Representations, inscriptions, descriptions and
learning: a kaleidoscope of windows. J Math Behav 17(2):
265–281
Kay A, Goldberg A (1977) Personal dynamic media. Computer
10(3):31–41
Keeling MJ, Grenfell BT (1997) Disease extinction and community
size: modeling the persistence of measles. Sci 275(5296):65–67
Klopfer E (2003) Technologies to support the creation of complex
systems models: using StarLogo software with students. Biosys-
tems 71(1–2):111–122
Kohn W (2003) Nobel lectures, chemistry 1996–2000. World
Scientiﬁc Publishing Co, Singapore, p 213
Konold C, Miller CD (2005) TinkerPlots: dynamic data exploration.
Computer software. Key Curriculum Press, Emeryville, CA
Lander ES, Schork NJ (1994) Genetic dissection of complex traits.
Sci 265(5181):2037–2048
Laszlo E (1996) The systems view of the world: a holistic vision for
our time, 2nd edn. Hampton Press, Cresskill, NJ
Lehrer R, Giles N, Schauble L (2002) Data modeling. In: Lehrer R,
Schauble L (eds) Investigating real data in the classroom:
expanding children’s understanding of mathematics and science.
Teachers College Press, New York, pp 1–26
Lehrer R, Romberg T (1996) Exploring children’s data modeling.
Cognition Instruct 14(1):69–108
Lubchenco J, Olson AM, Brubaker LB, Carpenter SR, Holland MM,
Hubbell SP et al (1991) The sustainable biosphere initiative: an
ecological research agenda: a report from the Ecological Society
of America. Ecology 72(2):371–412
Lehrer R, Schauble L (2006) Cultivating model-based reasoning in
science education. In: Sawyer RK (ed) The Cambridge handbook
of the learning sciences. Cambridge University Press, New York,
pp 371–388
Levy ST, Wilensky U (2008) Inventing a ‘ ‘Mid Level’ ’ to make ends
meet: reasoning between the levels of complexity. Cogn Instr
26(1):1–47
Levy ST, Wilensky U (2009) Crossing levels and representations: the
connected chemistry (CC1) curriculum. J Sci Educ Technol
18(3):224–242
Lin CC, Zhang M, Beck B, Olsen G (2009) Embedding computer
science concepts in K-12 science curricula. In: Proceedings of
the 40th ACM technical symposium on computer science
education. ACM, New York, pp 539–543
Linn MC, Clark D, Slotta JD (2003) WISE design for knowledge
integration. Sci Educ 87(4):517–538
Louca LT, Zacharia ZC (2012) Modeling-based learning in science
education: cognitive, metacognitive, social, material and episte-
mological contributions. Educ Rev 64(4):471–492
Manabe S, Stouffer RJ (1988) Two stable equilibria of a coupled
ocean–atmosphere model. J Clim 1:841–866
Margolis J (2008) Stuck in the shallow end: education, race, and
computing. The MIT Press, Cambridge
Margolis J, Fisher A (2003) Unlocking the clubhouse: women in
computing. The MIT Press, Cambridge
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Council of
Chief State School Ofﬁcers (2010) Common core state standards
for mathematics. National Governors Association Center for
Best Practices, Council of Chief State School Ofﬁcers, Wash-
ington, DC
National Research Council (2007) Taking science to school: learning
and teaching science in grades K-8. National Academies Press,
Washington, DC
National Research Council (2010) Report of a workshop on the scope
and nature of computational thinking. The National Academies
Press, Washington, DC
National Research Council (2011a) Learning science through com-
puter games and simulations. The National Academies Press,
Washington, DC
National Research Council (2011b) Report of a workshop of
pedagogical aspects of computational thinking. The National
Academies Press, Washington, DC
National Research Council (2012a) A framework for K-12 science
education: practices, crosscutting concepts, and core ideas.
National Academies Press, Washington, DC
National Research Council (2012b) Discipline-based education
research: understanding and improving learning in undergradu-
ate science and engineering. National Academies Press, Wash-
ington, DC
National Research Council (2012c) Education for life and work:
developing transferable knowledge and skills in the 21st century.
National Academies Press, Washington, DC
Newell A, Simon HA (1972) Human problem solving, vol 104.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ
NGSS Lead States (2013) Next generation science standards: for
states, by states. The National Academies Press, Washington,
DC
Olsen LF, Schaffer WM (1990) Chaos versus noisy periodicity:
alternative hypotheses for childhood epidemics. Sci
249(4968):499–504
Palumbo DB (1990) Programming language/problem solving
research: a review of relevant issues. Rev Educ Res 60(1):65–89
Papert S (1972) Teaching children to be mathematicians versus
teaching about mathematics. Int J Math Educ Sci Technol
3(3):249–262
Papert S (1980) Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas.
Basic books, New York
Papert S (1996) An exploration in the space of mathematics
educations. Int J Comput Math Learn 1(1):138–142
Parnafes O (2007) What does ‘ ‘fast’ ’ mean? understanding the
physical world through computational representations. J Learn
Sci 16(3):415–450
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 145
123
Penner DE (2000) Cognition, computers, and synthetic science:
building knowledge and meaning through modeling. Rev Res
Educ 25:1
Perkins K, Adams W, Dubson M, Finkelstein N, Reid S, Wieman C,
LeMaster R (2006) PhET: interactive simulations for teaching
and learning physics. Phys Teach 44(1):18
Perlis A (1962) The computer in the university. In: Greenberger M
(ed) Computers and the world of the future. MIT Press,
Cambridge, pp 180–219
Pople J (2003) Nobel lectures, chemistry 1996–2000. World Scientiﬁc
Publishing Co, Singapore, p 246
Redish EF, Wilson JM (1993) Student programming in the introduc-
tory physics course: mUPPET. Am J Phys 61:222–232
Repenning A, Webb D, Ioannidou A (2010) Scalable game design and
the development of a checklist for getting computational thinking
into public schools. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM technical
symposium on computer science education. pp 265–269
Resnick M, Silverman B, Kafai Y, Maloney J, Monroy-Herna ´ndez A,
Rusk N et al (2009) Scratch: programming for all. Commun
ACM 52(11):60
Richmond B, Peterson S, Vescuso P, Maville N (1987) An Academic
user’s guide to Stella Software. High Performance Systems, Inc,
Lyme, NH
Roschelle J, Kaput J, Stroup W (2000) SimCalc: accelerating student
engagement with the mathematics of change. In: Learning the
sciences of the 21st century: research, design, and implementing
advanced technology learning environments. pp 47–75
Rubin A, Nemirovsky R (1991) Cars, computers, and air pumps:
thoughts on the roles of physical and computer models in
learning the central concepts of calculus. In Underhill RG (ed)
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education—North American Chap-
ter Conference, Virginia, pp 168–174
Ryoo JJ, Margolis J, Lee CH, Sandoval CD, Goode J (2013)
Democratizing computer science knowledge: transforming the
face of computer science through public high school education.
Learn Media Technol 38(2):161–181
Schwarz CV, Meyer K, Sharma A (2007) Technology, pedagogy, and
epistemology: opportunities and challenges of using computer
modeling and simulation tools in elementary science methods.
J Sci Teach Educ 18(2):243–269
Sengupta P, Kinnebrew JS, Basu S, Biswas G, Clark D (2013)
Integrating computational thinking with K-12 science education
using agent-based computation: a theoretical framework. Educ
Inf Technol 18(2):351–380
Settle A, Franke B, Hansen R, Spaltro F, Jurisson C, Rennert-May C,
Wildeman B (2012) Infusing computational thinking into the
middle- and high-school curriculum. In: Proceedings of the 17th
ACM conference on Innovation and technology in computer
science education. ACM, New York, pp 22–27
Settle A, Goldberg DS, Barr V (2013) Beyond computer science:
computational thinking across disciplines. In: Proceedings of the
18th ACM conference on innovation and technology in computer
science education. ACM, New York, pp 311–312
Shaughnessy JM (2007) Research on statistics learning. In: Lester FK
(ed) Second handbook of research on mathematics teaching and
learning. Information Age Publishing, Charlotte, NC, pp 957–1009.
Sherin BL (2001) A comparison of programming languages and
algebraic notation as expressive languages for physics. Int J
Comput Math Learn 6(1):1–61
Sherin BL, diSessa AA, Hammer D (1993) Dynaturtle revisited:
learning physics through collaborative design of a computer
model. Interact Learn Environ 3(2):91–118
Srolovitz DJ, Anderson MP, Sahni PS, Grest GS (1984) Computer
simulation of grain growth—II: grain size distribution, topology,
and local dynamics. Acta Metall 32(5):793–802
Sterman J (2000) Business dynamics: systems thinking for a complex
world. Irwin/McGraw-Hill, New York
Stieff M, Wilensky U (2003) Connected chemistry: incorporating
interactive simulations into the chemistry classroom. J Sci Educ
Technol 12(3):285–302
Taub R, Armoni M, Bagno E, Ben-Ari M (2015) The effect of
computer science on physics learning in a computational science
environment. Comput Educ 87:10–23
Tinker RF, Xie Q (2008) Applying computational science to
education: the molecular workbench paradigm. Comput Sci
Eng 10(5):24–27
Turelli M, Barton NH (1994) Genetic and statistical analyses of
strong selection on polygenic traits: what, me normal? Genetics
138(3):913–941
Vogelsberger M, Genel S, Springel V, Torrey P, Sijacki D, Xu D et al
(2014) Introducing the illustris project: simulating the coevolu-
tion of dark and visible matter in the Universe. Mon Not R
Astron Soc 444(2):1518–1547
von Neumann J (1955) Method in the physical sciences. In: Bro ´dy F,
Va´mos T (eds) The Neumann compendium: world series in 20th
century mathematics, vol 1. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co,
Singapore, p 628
Wagh A, Wilensky U (2014) Seeing patterns of change: supporting
student noticing in building models of natural selection. In:
Proceedings of 2014 constructionism. Vienna, 19–23 Aug
Weintrop D, Wilensky U (2013) RoboBuilder: a computational thinking
game. In Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical symposium on
computer science education. ACM, Denver, pp 736–736
White BY (1993) ThinkerTools: causal models, conceptual change,
and science education. Cogn Instr 10(1):1
White BY, Frederiksen JR (1998) Inquiry, modeling, and metacog-
nition: making science accessible to all students. Cogn Instr
16(1):3–118
Wilensky U (1995) Paradox, programming, and learning probability:
a case study in a connected mathematics framework. J Math
Behav 14(2):253–280
Wilensky U (1997) What is normal anyway? therapy for epistemo-
logical anxiety. Educ Stud Math 33(2):171–202
Wilensky U (1999a) GasLab: an extensible modeling toolkit for
exploring statistical mechanics. In: Roberts N, Feurzeig W,
Hunter B (eds) Computer modeling and simulation in science
education. Springer, Berlin, pp 151–178
Wilensky U (1999b) NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and
Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston.
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo
Wilensky U (2001) Modeling nature’s emergent patterns with multi-
agent languages. In: Proceedings of EuroLogo. Linz, pp 1–6
Wilensky U (2003) Statistical mechanics for secondary school: the
GasLab multi-agent modeling toolkit. Int J Comput Math Learn
8(1):1–41
Wilensky U, Novak M (2010) Teaching and learning evolution as an
emergent process: the BEAGLE project. In: Taylor R, Ferrari M
(eds) Epistemology and science education: understanding the
evolution versus intelligent design controversy. Routledge, New
York
Wilensky U, Papert S (2010) Restructurations: reformulations of
knowledge disciplines through new representational forms. In:
Clayson J, Kalas I (eds) Proceedings of the constructionism 2010
conference. Paris. 10–14 Aug, p 97
Wilensky U, Rand W (2015) An introduction to agent-based
modeling: modeling natural, social and engineered complex
systems with NetLogo. MIT Press, Cambridge
Wilensky U, Reisman K (2006) Thinking like a wolf, a sheep, or a
ﬁreﬂy: learning biology through constructing and testing com-
putational theories—an embodied modeling approach. Cogn
Instr 24(2):171–209
146 J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147
123
Wilensky U, Resnick M (1999) Thinking in levels: a dynamic systems
approach to making sense of the world. J Sci Educ Technol
8(1):3–19
Wilensky U, Brady C, Horn M (2014) Fostering computational
literacy in science classrooms. Commun ACM 57(8):17–21
Wilkerson-Jerde MH (2014) Construction, categorization, and con-
sensus: student generated computational artifacts as a context for
disciplinary reﬂection. Educ Technol Res Dev 62(1):99–121
Wilkerson-Jerde MH, Wilensky U (2015) Patterns, probabilities, and
people: making sense of quantitative change in complex systems.
J Learn Sci 24(2):204–251
Wilkerson-Jerde MH, Gravel BE, Macrander CA (2015) Exploring
shifts in middle school learners’ modeling activity while
generating drawings, animations, and computational simulations
of molecular diffusion. J Sci Educ Technol 24(2–3):396–415
Wing JM (2006) Computational thinking. Commun ACM 49(3):
33–35
Wolfram S (2002) A new kind of science, 1st edn. Wolfram Media,
Tokyo
Yadav A, Zhou N, Mayﬁeld C, Hambrusch S, Korb JT (2011)
Introducing computational thinking in education courses. In:
Proceedings of the 42nd ACM technical symposium on Com-
puter science education, ACM, pp 465–470
Zuckerman O, Resnick M (2003) System blocks: a physical interface
for system dynamics learning. In: Proceedings of the 21st
international system dynamics conference. Citeseer, pp 810–811.
J Sci Educ Technol (2016) 25:127–147 147
123
